What are we gonna do?
Yeah, yeah, the information.
Oh, okay.
Good morning, Mr. Rushworth.
And I think you, are you gonna be joined by Mr.
Uh, ma Macklin?
Mr. Macklin? Yeah, he's right
Here. He's there, right. We,
sorry,
we're a little bit over time.
Uh, we're just having a briefing. So Floor is yours.
We've got 10 minutes, right?
Thanks very much. Um, um, so yes, I'm preparing
for the Law Society and we've have a written submission,
which you will have, and we've decided
to highlight three points from that submission, just
so we can get through it quickly.
And so the first point is mine.
Second to, uh, from, from Chris.
Uh, I'm gonna talk about the power to compel information
from owners, uh, as to who was driving.
And that's on page four of our written submission.
And it starts at paragraph 5.1,
but I'll, I'll just explain it in, in my own words and,
and not follow the, uh, text.
But that, that's where I'm, uh, that that's
where it all is in the submission.
The point is that in this bill,
there was quite understandably gonna be a legal power
to compel a registered owner of a vehicle to provide
identifying information as to
who was driving it on some occasion.
And is the offense then of failing to identify?
And that's, that's what makes it a compulsion to identify.
And the issue that we address in the submission is what's
to be done about the right against self-incrimination,
which New Zealand law recognizes in the Evidence
Act and the Bill of Rights.
Uh, to be clear, that right isn't generally impaired when
you simply ask an owner to identify the driver.
That isn't the problem. The point is that in some cases,
the phenomenon of of, of identifying the driver
might implicate the owner in criminal activity
and would therefore be something that he has a right not
to do in terms of the right against self-incrimination.
So that's a possibility inherent in all sorts of statutes
that require information to be provided compulsorily.
And the society's point is simply that in other contexts,
the law is made clear
that there is a right against self-incrimination,
which operates as an exception to the compulsory power
to provide information.
So the law society says that the same sort
of wording ought to be in this bill.
And we've set out two other statutes, which have examples
of the point more generally.
That's the Search and Surveillance Act
and the anti-Money laundering
and Counter Financing of Terrorism Act.
So that's the problem. Uh,
the Crown Law opinion about why the bill is consistent
with the Bill of Rights recognizes that essential problem.
But it says that well
and practice the courts can give discre, uh,
can give relief against a person who incriminates themselves
by declaring the evidence inadmissible.
And, and we say to that, that it's,
it's not conceptually right to rely upon
that post facto discretion.
The law ought to not to be enacted in a form
that contemplates the possibility of right speeches
and then simply requires the person
to rely upon a discretion.
It ought this bill, like the other examples we've given
to positively state the existence
of the right against self-incrimination.
And that would have the advantage
that a person would know about it at the time they're asked
to, uh, to give the information about who was driving.
So that's a potted summary of the point in our submission.
And so we would just recommend that the comm,
that the committee looks carefully at that
and considers bringing this into line
with the other examples that we've given.
So I'll pass to Chris for the second two points.
Uh, Kia Paul and Committee.
Um, the next two points for the law Society were also, um,
technical ones that we wanted to highlight this morning.
One being the convoy definition
to underpins the, the amendment signal.
And two, being the nature of the forfeiture regime proposed.
Uh, the society suggests strongly that the appeal rights,
um, coming off the back of these, uh,
changes are made criminal rather than civil.
I'll address convoy first.
Um, for those who are following along
or who want to see the, the detail that we won't have time
for this morning, um, the society has proposed some fixes
for the convoy definition at 4.7 of the written submissions
that's on page five of the PDF file.
Uh, I have in front of me,
you probably have in front of you.
The point, um, that we're trying to get at here is
that the definition at the moment is unworkable broad.
That's clearly intended to cut off any,
what shall I say, like innocent intermediaries
negating a convoy.
So by slotting in the odd Honda Jazz, driven by an innocent
person off to do the groceries, um,
we're not gonna undermine the convoy,
but the way it's been drafted then cast the net more widely
than that and, and effectively removes the intent provisions
that I think need to underpin an
intimidating gathering of vehicles.
And so the society has said that you need to be together.
Yeah. You
Got, So, um, from the comments there, I'm,
I'm picking up that we're, we're singing
to the choir on that one.
That's a helpful comment. What's your sec?
Uh, what's your other point?
The other point is to do with the, the forfeiture regime
and the proposed new section 1 4 2 double aam.
And this is where provision is made for forfeiture
and relief from it via appeal, so
that an innocent third party who buys a vehicle
that's been used in a convoy, um, has a right to try
and keep the vehicle even though
there may have been some forfeiture audit in respect
of its use in the convoy
and the way that it's been drafted,
places this in the court's civil jurisdiction,
whereas the closest analog
here is actually the criminal forfeiture regime
as an instrument of crime.
That's a good point. And again, it's a little bit
inside baseball in terms of our 10 minutes this morning.
But, uh, we, a forfeiture occurs as part of sentencing.
And something that's been used at the moment
for a qualifying instrument, forfeiture offense,
that's a criminal regime under the Sentencing Act, combined
with the Criminal Proceeds Recovery Act, the
new provision for vehicles coming out
of these convoys would most closely align with
that civil kind of procedure.
Part of sentencing dealt primarily in the criminal court.
And it is, even though driving in a convoy might not right
now, be a qualifying instrument, forfeiture offense,
parliament couldn't put it under
that same regime rather than covering off yet another
civil step.
And it's a much neat fit with criminal procedure
and the various standards of proof
and things that are already in waiting there for the court,
um, to, to try and slide it into the civil court.
And frankly, uh, if I might say as a lawyer, the district,
um, court's civil jurisdiction is
where this would probably end up, um, is very difficult, um,
and risks a lot of delays.
And, um, the district courts simply not that familiar
with civil forfeiture.
Uh, and it would create some real practical impediments
for those who, as I say, perhaps innocent purchases
and so on of a vehicle, um,
and who don't deserve to have it forfeit.
Um, and,
and by the way, in case anyone in the room cynical enough
to be thinking, but what if a innocent in that sense,
whether the court's well equipped to deal with
that under the instrument forfeiture regime as well.
So, um, happy to field questions at this point.
Okay. Of those two things.
Yeah, very, uh, very good. Three points.
We've got, um, Ms. Walters,
Uh, thank you Mr. Chair,
and thank you for drawing our attention
to the potential one car vo um, issue.
Um, a question for Paul, we've been discussing the scope
of the right to silence.
So as opposed to non self-incrimination, am I correct
that we are not just talking about section 28,
but section 12, um,
and that broader right to silence when questioned
by an official in terms of the case law that's come out?
Yes. I, I I would say that that, um, uh,
I mean I think it's section 14, the free freedom of
Expression, sorry, 14. Yeah,
Yeah, yeah. And,
um, and of course there's section 23 4, which is rights
to persons charged with an offense about against
self-incrimination, but we're not in that category here.
So we're in the section 14 territory.
That is when a person, any person is asked
to give information to the authorities, then, uh,
there's, you know, prima face, a free speech issue
that mm-hmm li liberty to speak,
include liberty not to speak.
And, uh, and so there is that right to silence,
which has always been in our legal system.
And so yes, it's section 14
that would be implicated, uh, in this setting.
Thank you. Right. Dr. Sudan, just first
One, just supplementary on that.
Do you think in this case would,
if you're looking at the limitations in section five,
what's your advice around whether this up holds up
to the limitations?
Uh, Are you able to comment?
Yes, yes. Well, I do, I, I, I think that the, uh,
the first point is that being asked to reveal the,
the driver as the registered owner, which is,
you know, the baseline of this legislation is,
is prima fai uh, a breach of the right not to have
to say anything at all, but it's quite reasonable to,
for society to say that the law should compel you
to disclose who was the, uh,
driving on the occasion in question.
So it's just, that's the starting point.
The second point is, it's just a subset of that phenomenon
where actually disclosing that, you know,
who the driver was on that occasion
might implicate you in some other crime.
And, and that's not gonna be, you know, the, the,
the normal situation.
But it can, uh, and will be the case sometimes.
And that's why these other examples would say, yes,
there is a right against
self-incrimination in our legal system.
And this compulsory power to have
to disclose information is not gonna take that away.
Generally, we'll have to disclose the information
and you'd commit the crime of not doing so if you don't.
But in the cases where doing so would incriminate you,
you've got the right not to.
So it's, it's just a subset of the, uh,
Hey, thank you. Thank
you both for a very, uh, helpful submission.
It was very thoughtful, pretty,
we don't have a bit more time,
but, uh, thank you for this, this morning
right now I've got AA down the back here, I think.
Do you want to come to the,
so we've got 10 minutes with you.
Um, please leave the time for a question. Alright,
Good morning. I'm Terry Collins.
I'm the principal
policy advisor with the aa.
Who besides me is, uh, Dylan Thompson, who's the manager of
Communications Research and Road Safety.
The submissions we're gonna give you
to you today have been tested
by the four 18 district counselors that make up the a aa.
We've also surveyed our members to ensure that
what we tell you reflects the majority
of our 1.1 million individual members.
Our members actually want tougher penalties.
They want those tougher penalties for dangerous behavior,
but they want the penalties to be reasonable.
We think some of the penalties in here are unreasonable
and actually instead of deterring antisocial behavior,
they'll actually increase community risk
and increase road safety.
And I'll give you a scenario to demonstrate that.
I've got a couple of young lads sitting in a car,
they're at the lights as young fellas do each,
you each egging each other on
and they do a burnout for about three
or four meters that's sustained loss of traction,
presumptive sentence.
You lose the car, the guy turns to the next one.
Well better be hung for a sheep than a lamb.
Don't stop because you're gonna lose the car whether you did
a three meter burnout or whether you flee the police
and caused a significant risk to the community.
So what you're doing is these young people
who don't think very well is saying,
well, why bother stopping?
So I think a really negative outcome of this,
having the presumption that all these offenses get locked in
as one, is that you'll elevate the, the offenses to,
as I said earlier, better hung for a sheep than a lamb.
I think what you should do is have all these sentences
discretionary, and that allows the judges
to look at the totality of the offending the circumstances
around it, and just make out whether it's a just
and fair system by discretion.
Whether a repeat offender is not a first offender and
therefore make a, a wise judicial decision,
taking all those things into consideration.
The other one has been touched on
by the law society in regard
to making a person be the bare witness
or self incriminate themselves.
And that's in the Bill of Rights.
And I'll give you another scenario here.
Parents have gone out, the kids have grabbed the car keys,
they've gone and gone to a boy racer event,
they haven't participated, but the police come
and everybody takes off.
Five of them are all in car rows, all
of a sudden they're in a convoy just
because the farmer didn't like it.
Now the court, they've got a camera shot of them,
they go knock on the parent's door.
How do they know who was driving?
How did the police tell you? 'cause now the defense is on
the owner of the car to prove they didn't know.
So it's kind of flipped from, um, being the right
to prove they're guilty to prove they're not guilty.
The other thing they're a bit scared of.
Finally, they find out who was driving,
who's the 19-year-old law student who's the son.
We dunno what his career damaged.
So the 12-year-old drove it ju justice system,
a different line of offenses.
You're gonna get some really perverse outcomes if you lump
these offenses all together.
Some for doing a burnout. Others for fleeing police,
I've got no sympathy for anybody fleeing the police.
It's a really dangerous behavior.
We should come down seriously on those
because it, it is a dangerous behavior
and we've doubled those offenses in the last five years from
about four and a half thousand to 9,000 in 2024 year.
So again, allow those things to be determined by the court.
It's by way of a court order.
So there's a high evidential proof that there was actually,
um, deliberate or what other circumstances around it,
but there's too many risks associated
with all lumping these offenses together.
And one presumptive sentence, um,
finally just looking at a couple of other ones.
Um, the $1,000 fine for not leaving an area. Okay?
We believe fines are appropriate for not leaving an area,
but if I get caught or somebody gets caught
with a blood alcohol limit of, uh, 250 micrograms of blood,
uh, liter, uh, my blood system,
but under 400, I get a $200 fine.
So, okay, I, I annoyed the police,
but I didn't leave the area at the time.
But is that worth five times the penalty of being,
having alcohol and peering your driving?
I just don't think there's relativity around the road risks
and the offenses that present also, the maximum fine no
for exceeding at the speed by about 45 Ks.
Now, which case you'll no in that one,
it's still $370 below that fine.
Now we know that these fines are gonna get elevated,
but I just think this ad hoc nature of it, you've got,
there's a bit of disparity.
There needs to be something we think
a thousands too by mm-hmm.
Finally, we'd just like to touch on the noise
and just refer to you to some consideration around that.
The Resource Management Act allows the seizure of stereos
and other devices played late at night that upset a piece
of calm of people.
It may be that these devices are fitted to vehicles,
they have to be removed
or they have to be forfeited
as the fur sanction you may want to consider so
that they lose this thing that's been bothering everybody.
That's my submission of allowed time for questions.
Right. Ms. Anderson, from your your view, do,
do you think increasing a fine has a direct impact on
behavior like deterring people from doing?
If you press the fine,
We think there's a package, we think there's a stronger
place for demerit points
that's very difficult to kind of work out.
Which for leaving an area perhaps it's hard
'cause they might have a license,
but it's a package of things.
What you find is those, um,
fines are dependent on the financial circumstances
of the person who's fined.
And we have far too many young people leading the justice
system because they couldn't pay fines yet.
We have other people who like the
south who could easily pay it.
Okay. I got Mr. Bates. Thanks chair.
Over time we are hearing from the community a very clear
direction that they expect there to be tough
and fine, tougher sentences and clear outcomes.
And I appreciate some of the points that you make.
But I suppose my underlying concern is you could end up
with a system that is, well you might get this
or you might get that, or you might get the other thing.
All depends on a whole lot of things.
So actually I'm not sure what's gonna happen
to me if I go into a burnout,
so I'm gonna go and do it anyway.
As opposed to if you go into a burnout, you're gonna end up
with your car either being impounded or, or being crushed
or you're out of it.
Shouldn't we just be clear if you do this,
this happens, end of story.
Well, I don't think presumptive
sentences are very rare things at all.
I think, I think murder, at least they have a parole period.
You're just saying one off, bang,
here we go, you lose your vehicle.
We're just worried about the unintended consequences
of such a unfair penalty.
'cause it, it represents such a broad range
of behaviors from a quick little
burnout to fleeing the police.
We think that those, those differences should be at the
discretion of the judiciary to decide where they fit.
It's not against the penalties, we just think they need
to be applied for the most egregious of behavior.
So what about the unfair outcomes for the community,
for the parks that end up with drivers all over them
with holes, the community that are wake woken up at night
because these drivers are making a whole lot of noise.
At what point do we just say, if you do
that, that's the system car?
Well now the same thing about it.
These penalties can be applied to them,
but I'm also, look what you did right?
There are a range of behaviors
and those sanctions the most severe should apply
to the most egregious behavior.
But what you've got is a amended bill that applied
to the minimal amount of behavior,
same as the most egregious.
We're saying there should be some discretion
to apply appropriate penalties given the range of offenders.
And we are worried about that. Unintended
consequences of fleet divers. Right.
We've got Dr. Nan, thank you chair.
Um, I wanted you just, uh, just
to follow up on something you mentioned in terms of the,
the risk of people going like,
well it's gonna happen anyway.
I might as well just go all the weight then which increases,
um, unsafe behavior, which increases the potential
of more police chasers,
which then increases more injury on both sides.
I cannot just check. That's something that you mentioned,
that's a possibility, right?
Yes. Which means that, yeah,
Look, if you look at the statistics of fleeing drivers,
they're usually young men
who haven't got a great frontal load
development and they make more decisions.
Do we don't really wanna be encouraging
'cause of they've been pulled over for doing a burnout
to then start fleeing the police.
That's about as simple as I could put it.
Would that then inadvertently actually put the community
at greater risk than just some additional noise?
Look, fleeing the police definitely puts community at
greater risk than doing a three meter burn. Yeah.
Thank you. Alright, thank you
for your on, it's very helpful.
Thank you. Right now we've got, um, Mr.
Bernie, uh, Walden, uh, mayor of
congratulations on your reelection.
Well, I presume you have,
otherwise you wouldn't be here in your capacity, but,
but congratulations anyway, um, mayor or your worship.
Now we've got, um, a few minutes with you.
We've got, uh, 10 minutes with you. Um, so floor, yours.
Um, thank you very much, chair
and, uh, to the rest of the committee, thank you
for the opportunity, uh,
to be able to talk to you this morning.
I look, district council strongly supports the antisocial
road user legislation amendment bill.
Uh, we consider this bill to be a necessary
and pragmatic step forward, improving public safety,
supporting the police,
and ensuring communities like ours are not subjected
to the fear and disruption caused by unlawful
and dangerous road behavior.
Our district, unfortunately,
has experienced the serious consequences
of antisocial road use firsthand.
In June, 2024, uh, more than 200 vehicles converged,
uh, the intersection, our largest, uh,
intersection in town in state highway one blocked
the street weapons were present,
and two police officers were injured.
And one year later, in May, 2025,
a so-called anniversary tomboy brought more than a thousand
people together under the same pretext.
Despite significant police preparation,
the gathering escalated into violence, fireworks,
physical aggression, and a vehicle
where were used against officers.
Uh, by the end of the night, seven people,
including two police officers were injured
and a number were arrested.
This is not only a colonel of event,
but in our neighboring, uh, areas around the region as well.
Uh, these events have had a profound impact on our,
on our residents, uh, both times, uh, we have been re uh,
very fearful and worried about the impact that
that is having on our community.
Uh, they've, uh, obviously not, uh, believed
that these are any acceptable
for a New Zealand community like ours to face.
Um, it's also important to realize
that it's not just a horror, uh, issue.
This is, uh, happening right round.
Uh, a number of places around our region
and often live in is the center for some reason
because of our presence of being on a state highway one.
So we do believe that it requires a stronger
and more proactive legislative response.
So we in support the intent of the bill, uh, we,
which will provide police for the powers to ne uh, necessary
to prevent or disperse such gatherings
before they escalate into dangerous situations.
Situations, um, situations.
If the poli, if the powers proposed
by this bill had been available in both 24
and 25, it's very likely that police could have prevented
a lot of the, um, disruption
and antisocial behavior that occurred in our town.
Uh, we therefore strongly support the proposed amendments
to the policing act, enabling police
to temporarily close areas to vehicle access,
where anti-social road use activity is occurring
or is reasonably expected to occur.
The proposed increases in infringement penalties
and the introduction of a new frightening
or intimidating convoy offense.
We also endorse the inclusion of both the behavioral, uh,
and mental element in this new offense requiring
that the activity be reckless or dangerous
and carried out with the intent to frighten or intimidate.
This is an important safeguard to ensure
that legitimate community events such as parades, funerals,
han processions, are not inadvertently captured.
We further note and support the application
of these provisions to beach areas,
which are legally defined, um, as
as public roads.
And we've observed an increase in anti-social
and unsafe driving behavior on our beaches.
And the additional enforcement tools this bill provides
would be highly invaluable
to protecting public safety in these environments.
So we do support the, uh, the bill it does for us,
represent a balance and essential response
to a growing issue of national significance.
It will reduce harm, prevent disorder,
and better enable police
to act proactively rather than reactively.
And we commend the government to bringing this bill forward
and thank the committee for the opportunity
to speak on our submissions.
Thank you, worship. Thank you.
Thank you. Worship. Now questions?
I don't have any questions. Thank you. Uh, right,
I've got one from Mr.
Erford. Um, thank you.
Uh, Bernie, can you just,
and I know you've touched on it a bit in your submission,
but, uh, many parts of why this legislation is coming is
because of the impacts that have happened in your community.
Um, so can you tell us about how, uh, the recent events,
for example, have impacted members of your community?
Um, whether that's created fear amongst them, uh,
what's the general mood of, uh, your horror?
No, community, please.
Uh, look, we are pretty, uh, well, incredibly fearful.
The fact that it happened once was bad enough.
Um, but the fact that it happened, uh,
exactly one year later was almost talked about in a,
in a sort of a, a a way that, uh, was going to test
and, uh, intimidate the community in terms of
what it was providing.
And the fact that, uh, despite the police presence, uh,
with helicopters, drones, uh, trying to block off streets
and things like that, they were unable to, uh,
lessen the impact of this.
Uh, probably put our community very fearful of, uh,
that obviously future events may occur, uh,
that this is gonna become, uh, you know, a regular feature.
Uh, but also, um, the fact
that it does not reflect well on anybody.
Uh, it's not just what's happening in Horford,
but it's happening right across, uh, a wide number of, uh,
regions across the country.
Uh, the fact that they think that this is okay to do is,
you know, needs to be stopped, uh, immediately.
And just supplementary to that,
what about the impact on those who, uh,
pass by, uh, the police officers who are working there?
Um, what do those sorts of events and meets have on them
and putting potentially their lives at risks
as well if they're just going about
their day-to-day business?
Well, the fact that you, uh, police had to commit, um,
such resource to try and stop
or prevent, uh, the event from happening in the first place
requires a huge, um, you know, time
and effort to, to try and do that.
I do wanna commend our, um, community camera trust,
uh, and the volunteers that do that.
So, although only seven
or eight arrests were made on the night of the event,
there have been significant number
of arrests following the event
because, uh, cameras have been able to identify drivers
and cars and vehicles.
So there have been, uh, in the end, uh, probably close to 25
to 30 arrests rather than the seven on the night.
So that has made a a difference.
And so the fact that, um, police are responding
that the community is responding and trying to prevent this,
but it does, um, you know, put our community under
considerable strain and the, and the
after effects are quite noticeable.
And, um, you know, we are a quiet, uh, generally,
uh, unaffected community with this sort of thing.
So when events like this happen, it does cause you know,
a real concern and fear.
Thank you. Alright. Thank you. Your worship.
Um, a very, uh, helpful submission.
Thank you. Right now we've got federated farmers,
Carol Dean and Jade McCormick.
Can are we are that available? Right?
Nice to see you this morning. Um, thank you very much.
Is Jade, is Jade joining you?
Yes, I believe she's, yep. There she is. You can hear me
Okay? We
can't quite see Jay there out.
Good morning to both of you. We've got 10 minutes.
Uh, please leave some time for questions.
Good morning and thank you
for the opportunity to appear today.
My name is Cal Day. I'm a dairy farmer from Canterbury
and the Federated Farmers Board
spokesperson on rural policing.
I'm joined by Jade McCormick, a senior policy advisor
and the Federated Farmers National Policy Team.
Federated Farmers supports strongly supports the intent
of the, however we recommend the three key
amendments be made.
One, extend the offense for frightening
or intimidating road use to include stock as dangerous.
Driving in rural settings can distress, injure
and even kill animals.
Two, ensure road closure powers are exercised
with regard to farming operations,
stop movement and animal welfare.
Mm. And three, recognize the bills dependency on rural
policing resources.
There are adequate resourcing.
These new powers won't really deliver real change.
Um, I do have a few examples here
that we've had from around the country.
So we'll just go over just a quick brief of those
and then we'll go to questions.
Um, so in the white kiddo, we've had groups
of boy races converging at rural intersections at night.
One farmer described bottles being thrown at cows
and the sounds of tires bursting nearby,
leaving stock terrified scattering through fences.
Yeah, yeah. Um, and we've even had miscarriages
of those animals from the front.
Um, 'cause of the activity.
Farmers are now avoiding keeping animals in roadside
paddocks on weekends
and on Thursday, Friday nights, um, to try to prevent
injuries or escapes because these boy races don't come
and tell you they've taken out offense.
You find out the next day.
Uh, we then also have the examples coming in
from up in Raglin.
So in Hamilton, um,
and again, same sort of thing, burnouts and skids.
Once a month they've got video evidence,
but then nothing gets done about it.
Um, frustration will boil over at some point
and that's not what anybody wants.
And thirdly, in South Taranaki we have an example
of a counselor saying,
races deliberately targeting small towns.
'cause police presence is light.
They can see police coming from a long way away
and they have many avenues to get out of the area.
And this is course the boy races actually block off roads
at, at each end, um, without consequence, uh,
because it just takes so, such a long time
to get their police presence into those rural areas.
Um, that's why we, we do commend councils like the wiper
district who introduced nighttime light vehicle bans,
um, known hotspots.
But again, as with this bill,
it only works if police have capacity to act.
So in closing, we support the bill
and urge the committee to ensure it protects people,
animals, and rural livelihoods.
We ask that you amend section 39 A to include livestock,
require police to consider farming operations from closing
roads and ensure there is enough officers on the ground
to make these powers meaningful.
Thank you for your time and I'm happy
to take any questions from the committee.
Right. Good. Thank you for your submission.
I think, uh, we've got Dr. Sudan. Is that,
Yeah. Um,
thank you for that submission, Carl,
and I think the point that you made about animal welfare
to be a particularly important one.
So thank you for alerting the, the seller committee to that.
Um, I have a question.
I was sort of more seeking your opinion on, um,
I don't know if you are aware,
but one of the possibilities that this bill may capture is,
for example, in the ground ground cell movement in terms of,
um, the protest against what, what was commonly known
as the u tax that would actually be considered, uh,
a intimidating con could be considered an intimidating
convoy under this current, uh, new legislation.
I wonder if you have any comments around that
because when we're looking at, for example,
around the unnecessary exhibition of speed,
it is both an increase in speed
but also potentially a decrease in speed.
So there's actually a lots of situations where
that might affect, uh, road usage,
particularly in rural areas where, uh, vehicles
or certain convoys, um, that farmers might be used to
requires a significant reduction in speed might also
be captured in this bill.
Do you have any comments on those two scenarios?
Uh, yes. Thank you for that, that question. The query.
I, I suppose the biggest thing is when there's a protest
done, it's normally well notified.
Um, you know, it's notified to the public,
it's notified a lease.
Um, we, we don't just, most of these groundswell people,
they don't just go and decide to have a protest tomorrow.
Um, they take organizing.
So it's a completely different aspect
and I would assume the police
and the public would see it that way as well.
Um, one being completely organized and well publicized
and one being in the middle of the night
where no one knows about it other than a few select people.
Um, but yes, I do agree.
You know, like obviously people would get frustrated if
there was all of a sudden a massive convoy tractors
with no notice, um, slowing down traffic.
Right. You right, right.
Well I'm gonna go to Mr. Bates. Thank
You chair. Um, thanks
Kyle. I think that was a great, um, answer
regarding the tractor protests being, uh, advised in advance
goes back to the South Taranaki example that you used.
And just if you could give, uh, the committee a sense of
how, um, you think this bill will support the community in
the likes of South Taranaki feeling, um, about road
or antisocial road users.
I suppose it, it sort of goes down to the points one
and three and the fact
that obviously there is distress cause
to livestock in those rural areas,
but there does need to be that resourcing to be able to go
and do ca you know, for the police to actually be able
to sort of do a net sort of situation.
Mm-hmm. Um, to actually, I, I think the biggest thing is
that if there's fear struck into a certain percentage
of these boy races, it will in time reduce the offending.
'cause at the end of the day it's, it's, we only need
to make an example of a small percentage
to change the attitude and the behavior.
Exactly right. Alright.
Hey, thank you for your submission.
Um, two interesting points.
One about the stock, the other one is about allowing farmers
access through those designated areas, uh, which I assume,
uh, would be catered for.
But thank you for your submission this morning.
Thank you very much for your time.
Right now we have quieter and safer Roads task force.
I think we've got one person in person.
We have, um, I presume, I dunno whether that's Scott.
Yeah. And we've got someone else online. Okay.
Who's leading it? Ah, Dave is leading straight enough.
Dave, Dave, we're waiting with in anticipation.
Dave, you there?
Hi, how is that?
Yeah, very good. We can hear you. Um, okay, great.
Your colleagues here. Uh, we've got 10 minutes.
Um, hi Kira
and thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
Uh, my name is Dave Dunley
and I'm here on behalf of the Quieter
and Safer Roads Task Force.
It's a community group that was formed
by residents across banks peninsula and beyond.
Uh, after we've had enough of the ongoing boy racer activity
that disrupts our lives and communities.
Now I've lived in Littleton for 30 years
and I'm on one of the roads that is used by the Boy Racers.
Uh, recently I ran for council
and traveled widely across banks peninsula.
And by far and away this was the number one issue
for the people of the area.
From Littleton all the way through to, um, aura.
We hear the same frustration about the noise
that is waking people at nighttime,
seeing the burnouts on the rural intersections.
And we basically feel powerless to stop it.
Uh, yes, speeding is a problem.
The occasional large gathering is a problem, but
because of our roads and area that
that's not the major issue.
The real issue for us is, and, and,
and it literally drives people to tears, is the noise,
the noise, the noise.
It's relentless. It echoes
through the valleys across the harbor
and into the homes at all hours of the night.
And for many residents,
it's been happening for over 20 years.
Uh, two decades of broken sleep, the intimidation
and feeling ignored.
And now we recently had a public meeting
and had a terrific turnout, uh,
people from all ages from all around the peninsula.
And the message was loud and clear.
We're fed up with the lack of help and resources
and people feeling abandoned.
So that's why we've started this initiative
with the task force to raise our own money
to rent mobile cameras for two months,
to capture hard data on speed, on noise levels and where
and where this is happening.
Um, we are forced to having to do this ourselves now.
Once the trial is over, we'll share the results
with the police and NZTA, um,
and then we're hoping that we can have those cameras in a,
uh, on a permanent basis to, uh, create enforcement
around the area.
Basically, it's a common sense,
local solution to a local problem.
Now we welcome this legislation that you you've got today,
uh, and the intent behind it, uh,
to give the police the stronger powers.
But again, it's the noise for us
that is one of the key issues.
So that enforcement needs resourcing, uh, the technology
of cameras, it's there, uh, that just needs to sort
of start rolling out through the community.
And that the community involvement works
because we're such a large area
that the speeding the noise happens
across the whole peninsula.
Um, so ultimately
what it's about is protecting the people's right to sleep,
uh, to feel safe and live peacefully in their homes.
Um, I want to acknowledge the police
who are doing their best within the current limits.
Uh, they're under resourced here in the peninsula,
but we've got hundreds of residents
who have made written submissions.
Uh, they've gathered evidence,
which Scott will talk about in a moment.
And we're hoping that, uh, this legislation, uh,
we're finally going to be heard.
So thank you for listening and I'll now hand you over
to Scott who's got a lot more of the technical detail
of research he's already done.
Not too much technical. Okay. Scott Adams.
I'm, I'm a resident of nine years in, in Littleton Harbor.
And, um, we've been working on this for,
for quite some, some, some years.
And thanks for Dave Dunley. It's got now got its more
impetus and more, more potential for doing something.
I thought I'd just share a quick story.
So on Tuesday night, I'm, I'm a member
of the community patrol, went out to Evans Pass,
and while I was there, some boy racers turned up in the car
park at the top of Evans Pass, about 10 of them.
And can I say firstly, they're quite polite, quite polite,
and very well informed, and they knew exactly what to do.
So, for example, one of their cars was sitting beside me
with just idling,
but idling at 95 decibels,
which is incredibly loud about the sound of a sound
of a jackhammer or the sound of electric drill.
But they know that 95 decibels is within the
law, and that's what they do.
They also know that when they take off, which they did,
that, they'll go immediately over 95 decibels, sometimes up
to a hundred, 110 decibels, which is very, very loud.
So that, that, that, that damages your hearing.
And when you are living in Cas Bay,
as I do in Littleton Harbor,
that means I get woken up at night.
It also means that, um, if you want to talk,
you've gotta raise your voice.
And it's not just a case of occasionally,
it's very persistent.
So what we've previously proven using some, um,
some technology just to record noise, that it is persistent.
It's very, very loud, usually on the Thursday, Friday,
Saturday nights as you've heard before.
But what we're also finding is it also happens two,
three o'clock in the morning as well.
So what we'd like to do now is put a camera in,
as Dave was saying, but that camera record not just noise,
but also speed, but also time and date
and can also record if people are doing burnouts as well,
the loss, sustain loss attraction.
So with that information, we're not gonna share it publicly,
but we will share it with the NZTA and with NZ Police.
Mm-hmm. And we believe what can happen from there,
there'll be enough data to sustain what, what, what to
reinforce what we've been saying,
that something needs to be done.
So in summary, we do absolutely support antisocial roads,
um, uh, amendment.
We think that excessive noise needs to be better defined.
95 decibels is very loud, most countries
around the world at 72.
Mm-hmm. And we think that there will be means
to actually better means for the police, um, NCTA
and warrant, warrant of fitness and so forth,
to actually measure what's actually coming out of
that exhaust in terms of sound.
And we want to use those number plate recognizing
cameras for a trial period.
But we also then would like funding to help continue beyond
that trial period to que this problem. Question. Thank you.
Okay. I've got, um, Mr. Gra
Thank you gentlemen.
Um, recently I had the pleasure of being in that area, um,
driving around with your local member of Parliament, Dr.
Vanessa Winnick. And, um, she, she said that it's so bad
that many people unfortunately have left the homes sold
and left the homes that they love.
Um, it, um, you're seeing,
you nod your head, so that's correct. Yeah,
Absolutely. Those have
bought, bought homes and,
and then found out the problem is, I mean,
very, very disappointed. Mm-hmm.
And the second question, if I may, if you don't mind, the,
the, the young chaps that you say that you speak to,
and at first they're quite polite.
Um, I'm presuming, uh, some of you have over the years
directly asked them to please stop.
Um, what, what's usually the response?
I don't know if there's one answer, but, but,
but they know their rights.
Absolutely know the rights. So I know,
I know the local sergeant very well
and he knows he's really gotta be on top of his game
to actually get them on something.
So, um, what I usually find is they are, they're polite,
they're usually nice, nice men.
It's just this is fun
and they really enjoy what they're doing.
They don't completely realize the
consequences of what they're doing. Thank you.
Right. Ms. Anderson, just,
just interested what's their track?
So they're coming through Littleton
and then going around the bays.
'cause ca bays a fair way round.
So they're going all the way around the bays and then what's
Their look? Yeah, there's a few
racetracks.
One, one is from Evans Pass, which is a connection
between summer and Ton.
Yeah. So that road in particular, they love.
So they do 80 some, I think they do up
to a hundred kilometers now up on that road,
but I'm not sure 'cause it's such a, a wa wey road.
But while I drove up there on Tuesday night,
you drive slowly 'cause you know there's a good chance
there's gonna be a car on yours
on the road as you come around the corner.
Yeah. And it's a beautiful road now. Yeah.
But too beautiful. So they drive
through Littleton all the way through to Cas Bay,
then either up dies pass or around to G's pass. Right.
Right. And how many at a time?
Like 3, 4, 5, 10, like what's
The usually two to three?
Two to three is the number. Yeah.
But we've seen 50, seen a hundred. Yeah.
Yeah. And do they continually drive that loop
or they pump up, like what's their
They'll do different loops.
They love going through the tunnel
'cause of the noise they exhaust.
Yeah. But they'll do, they'll do a different loop. Yeah.
They also know the police won't come over the hill
unless there's a lot of 'em
and it's really causing some issues. Yeah.
Thank you. Can I ask about the camera?
You, you're saying the camera can also record sound? Yes.
And all. Yes. Is that most, um, correct.
That's a very specialized camera. I take it.
This camera that we are gonna use to begin
with is a camera and a sound recorder.
We're getting them from two separate sources,
combining 'em together, combine the data together.
Right. But you can get noise
number plate recognizing speed cameras with noise detection
Aggravated by noise. Yeah,
very. And we don't have any NZT.
No. There's a, uh,
it is a frequency issue that has to be dealt with. Right,
Right. Dr.
Nan, last question.
Oh, thank you. Um, yes, I agree with
what you're saying in terms of the fact
that residents should have over
and have enjoyment, you know, in a quiet space.
Uh, but one of the things, some of the things we've heard,
two things is, um, Dave, one
of the things you mentioned is in terms
of additional police resourcing
that's not guaranteed under this bill.
So, you know, yes, it does create framework,
but I just want to preface it by,
it doesn't necessarily mean that there's gonna be magical
increase in terms of sourcing.
Yeah, yeah. Um, just in terms of raw expectations.
The other question I have is you mentioned that the noise
and actually kind of like the, your idea, so has that been,
because that's not necessarily in this bill in terms
of reducing that disbel from 95 to 72.
Mm-hmm. Um, maybe that is actually a more effective way
because one of the things
that has been raising concerns either with the law society,
but also with AA, is the fact
that there's a blanket one size fits all depending on if you
do a three meter burnout or if you go all the way.
And this actually will encourage people to go, we might
as well go all the way since it's the same punishment
anyway, which then creates more risk
and potentially more harms the communities.
I wondered if you thought about the, the balancing
that is required for this bill
To, to some extent.
Yeah. Obviously we are focused on trying
to eliminate the noise.
Yeah. So we, what we, we've assessed is
that globally 72 seems to be, be the level Australia's 95,
but for cars older than 1982, yeah, we're 2008.
So there's quite a disparity in
terms of what we've actually got in place.
Mm-hmm. But when you hear 95 decibels to a hundred decibels
to 110 decibels, um, it's really, really loud.
And if you've got a 95 decibel car
that passes a war on fitness,
it can still create a lot of noise.
So we we agree what we're saying,
we think it's a very good means of actually
reducing the problem by focusing on the noise. Yeah,
Right. Can I just,
Sorry, can I just add that rock concerts are not allowed
to operate in open parks at 95 decibels?
That's over a sustained time.
Yeah, but they're not allowed to be that loud.
Okay. All cool. Thank you.
All I can say to you, Scott, is I hope you enjoy the, um,
soft docent tones of government
in Wellington. My voice
Is not.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Right now we've got, uh,
community law, uh, by zoom.
Hello. Nice to see you. Are you on your own?
I thought you were gonna have some colleagues. Oh,
I hope I've got some colleagues.
Yes. I've got Andy here.
I'm not sure if we've got, um, Angela, she's in court today,
but, um, I've got Andy here, so, um,
yeah, Koto members of the committee.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Thank you
for the opportunity to attend today.
I'm here as you know, for community law centers ro, um,
which represents 24 community law
centers across the country.
I'm here with Andy Ogilvy of Canterbury Community Law.
Um, Andy, do you wanna introduce yourself?
Yes. Um, good morning. Members of the, um, committee.
Uh, I am a lawyer in Christchurch
and also a, a lawyer at community law.
So I'm in both, um, community law practice
and in private practice
and have had, uh, several, um,
involvements in, uh, boy racer incidents, uh,
or defending people in boy racer incidents, um,
in my private practice, um, under the current legislation.
Thanks Andy. Um, I'm just gonna cover the main, some
of the main points and then leave time for questions.
Um, first just to say that we understand that
what this bill is trying to achieve
and it's trying to address the harm that can be caused
by street racing and other, um, driving offenses.
Um, our view is that the current offenses are sufficient
and that this new offense in section 39 A, um,
and the associated sentencing mechanisms, um, uh,
are disproportionate compared
with other offenses like excess breath alcohol.
Um, we are concerned about the effect
of changes in this bill on young people in particular.
Um, we see traffic offenses being a gateway into the
criminal justice system, which can have a,
which can have long-term effects
on the lives of young people.
You lose your car, you lose your ability to get to work
or school, you get into debt and things spiral from there.
We think that this bill will exacerbate this problem.
Um, and we especially, especially given
that legal aid is not available for these, um, offenses, um,
community law centers see, also see the inequity
that affects some young people from less privileged
backgrounds and how they experience
the criminal justice system.
They're less likely to have the resources to respond, um,
to their offending and be able to pay for services
to get a limited license, for example.
Um, we are concerned that this will add to this inequity.
We are though pleased to support the repeal
of section 96 AAA
and our submissions outline the problems that we saw
with the six month impoundment period
and we are pleased to see the consistent 28 day period
just moving to the new offense.
Um, in section 39 A
and the new section 39 A, we think that the definition
of convoy is problematic
because a convoy really needs more than two people.
And under the definition of in the act, only one
of those people actually needs to have the intention
of being in the convoy.
And we, uh, submit that in ordinary usage.
There needs to be some sort of shared understanding about
traveling in a convoy.
We wonder whether this is supposed
to address some other kind of convoy such
as a funeral procession.
Um, but the rest of section 39 A doesn't seem
to fit the kind of slower driving
that usually takes place in a funeral procession.
So perhaps the new offense is trying to do too much
and address too many issues in one go
and actually create confusion.
Um, we are concerned
that there are more situations now in which the bill,
in the bill in which people are required
to provide information to the police immediately, uh,
register owners of vehicles may have legitimate reasons
to be concerned about passing on this information
and should be given time to seek legal advice.
They may not know in the first instance who is driving.
They may need time to find out, they might be, um, wanting
to know what the ramifications are
and, um, to understand
what will happen once they give that information.
They may be experiencing family violence.
Um, it's not really clear to us why the 14 days, um,
has been removed in the bill, um, just about impoundments.
Um, we are concerned, um,
that there are now more situations in which cars can be
impounded where there's been a reasonable belief.
Um, we do, there is, there does have to be a failure
to provide information and from,
and um, a serious threat to road safety.
But that said, we think, um,
that there should be large charges laid
before a vehicle is impounded.
Um, and we are also concerned about the new section 35 A in
the policing act, which would, um,
broaden those police powers.
Um, in terms of closing roads.
Um, police would now be able to tra
to close traffic any place that is capable of being used
for motor vehicle access.
We think it's, um, too dis, too broad
and um, could do with some, um, limitations there.
That's all I really wanna say, um, in terms of summary
summarizing our submissions and really open to,
um, questions on this bill.
Thank you. Okay, Mr. Radford, um,
Thank you very much for your submission.
Karen. You made a comment in your submission around, uh,
that this could be a gateway for, uh,
potentially young people in particular
into the justice system.
What is a preventative tool instead of this legislation
to stop people from having these illegal meets,
putting people's lives at risk, the additional cost
to resources to police?
What can be done to mitigate that instead?
I guess we would say we don't think the new chart,
the new offense does anything towards that.
Um, I'm not an expert on um,
I guess youth development, um,
and what kinds of, uh,
other alternatives could be put in place.
Um, but what we are saying is
that this partic this offense doesn't,
doesn't address those issues.
But in terms of entry into the, um,
into the criminal justice system, we'd say
that legal aid should be available, um,
for these kind of offenses.
What about the comment you made
around young people potentially having their car impounded,
crush potentially going into debt as well?
Around the other side of the argument would, which would say
you make a knowing choice to attend a legal, uh, meet,
which potentially can have massive ramifications for lives
to the safety of the community
and what can be done to actually deter people from doing
that in the instance eg uh, those young people
or whatever age they may be, have made that decision
and these are the ramifications for making such decisions.
Mm-hmm.
I guess again, I would say that the new offense,
we don't think the bill does anything to, uh,
that would help those young people.
Like it, it just continues that adding on more offenses
and I can't really see,
we just don't think the new offense addresses that.
Andy, do you have anything to add on that front?
Um, I, I would just say in in response to that, that, um,
in the courts it's, it's well recognized that, uh,
young men in particular, um, uh, don't,
don't have a fully engaged brain
until about 25 years of age.
So, um, that's normally something
that's taken into account under sentencing, uh, processes,
but that's not going to stop, that's not going
to stop these groups regardless of the consequence.
Um, particularly as a lot of the cars that seem
to be involved in the large group meetings.
Um, uh, um, particularly out, I I live in ran
and out our way.
We have, um, a lot of boy race, uh, activities
with skid pans
and so forth on, on the roads at, um,
all hours of the night.
A little like, um, a little like the,
this previous submitters from, um,
from Banks Peninsula
and they're older cars,
they're probably worth 500, $600
and they're purchased just to do those skids.
And quite frankly, those people aren't going
to give us stuff if it's crushed.
Um, I, I
am also very, very concerned about the, the, um,
powers of uh, or the extension to the fleeing driver.
Um
Right. And I'm gonna have
to oppose. Yeah, right.
Hey, thank you. Um, thank you.
I'm just, sorry we are just running over time a bit,
but thank you for your comments this morning.
Thank you for submission and taking the time.
Um, and uh, always useful for part of that uh, conversation.
Right now we are going to go to the law association as well.
Um, we are doing that by Zoom, is that right?
Yes, good morning. How are you going?
Morning, we've got, uh, 10 minutes with you.
Um, so please leave some time for questions. Thank you.
I will do my best, but I'm a lawyer.
It's very difficult for us to leave times for questions
Yourself.
Yes,
I do try my best.
Uh, good morning. Thank you so much for the opportunity.
It's quite good that we can get involved
and despite having a different opinion,
at least we can tell you guys from the experience we have on
the ground dealing with these type of offending.
So look, let me just make it very clear
that we completely understand the motivation behind the bill
and everyone wants safer roads
and I do personally do not like boy races.
So this is something that I share the concern with everyone
who's basically here to try to advocate for the bill,
but we do not support it for the following reason.
I think it's really important
because the question here isn't whether we share the goal,
it's really about how to get there.
I think that's the main point here.
Our concern is
that the bill goes too far in creating new offenses
and I'm completely in agreement with the previous speaker
and the mandatory penalties when the law already provide
various strong tools to deal with this behavior.
If we keep adding new offenses every time a problem arises,
then we really risking over criminalizing
and clogging the courts,
because the current government is very focused on getting
rid of the backlog
and creating all these new offenses is going
to have an opposite effect.
So we need to be very careful about that.
One of the issues that we have
with the bill is the evidence.
It's just the evidence problem.
We, yes, we want a safer road,
but at the moment the evidence, evidence-based base
around the spill is very, very thin.
We really do not have the data on
how common these behaviors are,
and that's based on the actual bill.
It's based on what we have read, which was sent to us,
or whether the proposed tools will actually reduce them.
That is the main issue.
Some parts of the bill also depend on resources like a
specialist noise testing and extra enforcement.
And I really don't know whether we have that available.
Uh, that extra resourcing.
You also have to be very careful
because there's a real risk of uneven impacts.
We already know that Maoris are overrepresented
and similar enforcement, and if we add these new offenses
and higher penalties without proper safeguards,
we risk making that even worse.
So yes, we do want to fix the harm,
but we need to do it with evidence.
We can't do it with assumptions.
So look, just going briefly through the problem,
we do have existing tools available.
Okay? So we do have already plenty
of powers under the legislation, the Land Transport Act,
sometimes the Crimes Act dangerous
or reckless driving charges sustain loss
of traction charges, impoundment
and disqualification, noise control powers,
disorderly behavior offenses.
So we are not saying
that antisocial behavior isn't a problem, we're saying
that the tools already exist.
Mm-hmm. And the solution is to use them properly, not
to keep creating new overlapping offenses
and complicate things.
And especially removing discretion from judges.
You need to be very careful with that.
So some part of the bill is really going too far.
For example, the mandatory vehicle destruction,
predictive police closure, power, forced
identification duties, they all raise real concerns.
And my view, well basically in the committee's view under
the New Zealand Bill of Rights, we need to balance safety
with furnace and proportionality.
So you need to be very careful when you go down that route.
If someone loses their car on a first offense, even, even
if no harm was caused, that is a severe punishment.
And you really need to bear in mind that some of these kids,
they don't own the vehicle,
the family members own the vehicle,
the finance company owns the car.
So you basically indirectly punishing a third party here.
So you really need to target deliberate,
harmful conduct the vehicle forfeiture and destruction.
You're forcing judges to order forfeiture,
even destruction on a vehicle, on a first offense
that really removes judicial discretion.
So it's very extreme.
And if you are content to go through with this bill,
we seriously suggest
that you make the forfeiture absolutely discretionary
because it shouldn't be mandatory.
And the reserve destruction for repeats, you really need
to reserve destruction for repeat offending.
That is another suggestion if, uh,
you contend to go through with the bill.
So in terms of, look,
I'm just gonna make it very quick in
terms of the rest of it.
In terms of compelled identification duties,
that's another concern we have.
The bill forces vehicle owners are hire to identify
who was driving with the fine up to $20,000.
If they don't, at the moment, we do have that discretion.
We have a section 1 1 8 notice, which you have
to identify the driver of the vehicle,
but you have to prove that you have taken
reasonable, um, reasonable steps to identify,
uh, the driver of the vehicle.
You're taking that away under the new bill,
under the linear legislation.
So if you are, again, content to go through with it,
you need to add reasonable steps.
You can't make things mandatory in a way that it is.
So I'll give you one example.
The government a few months ago passed legislation, uh,
where in terms of, um,
where if someone, if there's a police pursuit
and the person doesn't stop
and there's a danger element, dangerous element to it, then
previously they would have the car impounded
for 28 days under the new legislation is six months
immediately impoundment of the vehicle
before even the person is convicted of that offense.
So failing to stop six months mandatory,
that person is still going through the court.
That's a good example of telling you why
harsher penalties doesn't work,
because that has created a lot
of problems within the court system.
And lawyers have come up with a way to fight that.
And one of the big problems
that we have when the car has been impounded, for example,
for six months, three months being passed,
police cannot prove the charge of failing to stop.
The charge gets withdrawn halfway through.
So the main problem that we have now, who's paying
for the impoundment fee?
Because theoretically police is,
and police have to pay for the impoundment fee.
And they have accepted that on numerous occasions
because the charge is no longer a charge
and the charge has been withdrawn.
So when you pass legislation, you've got
to be careful about the practical element of it
and whether it's going to work in pr, in, in,
in practice or not.
So just repeating myself, we're not here to criticize,
we're just here to make, to help to make it all work.
'cause we know how these things operate on the ground.
Hey, thank you. And very substantive, uh, submission.
I've got, uh, Ms. Nala with a question.
Sure. Hi, uh, hi Sam.
Um, look, thank you for the time
that you all put into these submissions.
It's doesn't go unnoticed.
Um, you were saying that earlier that the sentence, um,
will be punishing other people as well.
Mm-hmm. And, and I just wanna ask you with respect to that,
the sentencing act, as you know, has, um,
purposes of sentencing.
And section seven, subsection one F1 of the purposes is
to deter the offender
or other persons from committing the same
or similar offense.
Mm-hmm. Wouldn't you say that applies here, Samira?
Absolutely. It applies here completely. Okay.
But what I'm saying is that if you have a 19-year-old,
for example, at home and you're asleep, okay,
and they take the car and go
and do whatever stupid, you know, you're the mother,
you know, you've done everything you could have done in your
capacity and you are the one who will end up
with losing the car.
And this is what we see quite often at the moment
that the parents' vehicles that they heavily rely on
for driving just because of the stupidity of their kids,
because the front lobe of the brain is not, uh,
developed properly at the age of 19 or 20.
They're the ones who will end up suffering the consequences.
They can't get the car out of impoundment.
It's very difficult, I can tell you that.
Uh, so they basically have to live with
that financial crisis and not having the use of the vehicle.
My point was that it's an unfair punishment
and a third party at the moment, it's discretionary,
but under the bill it becomes mandatory.
So we are saying that keep that discretion there
if the bill is going to be passed into law,
and uh, don't make it the mandatory element.
Okay, you have a follow
Up, but Samir, by doing this,
the the 19-year-old should learn that.
Look at how much I've made my family and others suffer.
And other people should learn that too.
That's part of the purpose.
That's correct. But then you're looking at,
and you what,
the way you're looking at it, I get your point of view.
Okay? I completely get where you're coming from.
And it frustrates me as well as a lawyer when I have to deal
with young people because they just, you have
to keep telling them, you know,
and it's like, it's, it's a learning process.
But uh, if, if you look at it, if you look at it that way,
you are looking at pa the purpose
of sentencing act is not just punishment, okay?
It's also deterrent and it's also rehabilitation.
So the way the bill is drafted at the moment is mainly
focused on punishment.
Okay? And we do need to look at the other aspect
of the sentencing as well.
So that's where we are coming from to have to keep
that balance and to have that balance.
That's why I said in my submissions, one of the concerns
that we have is that some of these, um, some
of these powers can be exercised as on a first defense.
If you put it as a repeated defending,
that's a different story.
Okay. So, and we do have
that power already under the legislation
and we are saying that it's probably enough.
But, um, I hope that I made my point.
Yeah, you have an excellent point
and thank you very much for your submission this morning.
Thank you very much for the opportunity. Have a good day.
Bye-bye. Bye.
Bye-bye. Now we've got, uh, Danika, uh,
Marshall, uh, by Zoom.
I saw you doing that before. Danika, are you with us?
Uh, yes I am. Nice to hear from you this morning.
Now we've got a few minutes with you.
Um, hopefully you can leave a mine or two for a question.
We've got five minutes.
Um, thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
Um, I'm here to strongly support the passing
of this legislation to tackle antisocial road behavior.
Um, it's a obviously ongoing issue, um,
throughout the country.
Um, it's dangerous, intimidating,
and deeply affects the wellbeing of communities,
including my community also.
Um, I have lived at my current property
for the past three years.
Um, we have a large intersection just down the road.
Um, and this is an ongoing issue every Friday, Saturday, um,
and sometimes during the week as well.
We have really large numbers turn up.
Um, we've experienced obviously the skids and burnouts.
They leave a huge amount of rubbish on the intersection,
destroy road markings.
Um, they pull road signs down.
Um, there's fireworks, alcohol consumption.
Um, they've also completely blocked the intersections at
times so that local residents can't actually get home.
Yeah. Um, we've had countless sleepless nights.
Um, we feel totally unsafe when this is going on.
Um, we've had some even come onto our property.
Um, the police responses are often too late at the moment
and we've got the same offenders returning every single week
because, um,
obviously there's just the current system doesn't give the
police the tools to act, um, fast or effectively enough.
Um, so we need a law that allows for proactive enforcement
and not just reactive.
Um, I believe that police should be able
to immediately arrest offenders and impound vehicles.
Um, I think that hotspots like my intersection,
we need to have, um, cameras, um,
and possibly plate recognition, um, is,
provides both evidence and deterrence.
Um, I think the police need more modern tools
to avoid detection
because often we have large gatherings, um,
and they also, the people are carrying
radios which can tap into the police communications.
So by the time the police get there,
they've already all dispersed, which means that
there's no enforcement.
Um, I think that also the use
of monitoring the different Facebook groups,
because oftentimes the events are pre-planned.
Um, and so you have a large gathering, um,
through social media, um, outlets.
Um, yeah,
I think we need coordinated operations
to stop events in real time
and not just have the cleanup afterwards.
Um, and also a visible police presence.
Alright. Um,
I know I good.
Oh yeah, right. Um, we are just running outta time.
Can, um, I've got people lining up to ask you questions.
Mm-hmm. Can I, um, uh, first one I'm gonna go
with is Mr. Stevenson. Thank
You. Thank you for your submission.
Um, just wanted to understand you,
you mentioned there's actually people coming
onto your property.
I just wanna hear a little bit more about that
'cause it sounds pretty frightening and Yeah,
So acceptable.
We are not, we obviously live not far from the intersection,
so oftentimes it's a, it's a four-way intersection.
So oftentimes there'll be that ma like
that many people turn up there,
that they're actually lined up all the way down each
end of the intersection.
So we've had them outside our house, we've had them just
outside our gate,
and I'm standing there in my house watching,
and obviously the police have not turned up.
I've already called them five
or six times that night, they're not coming.
And I'm like, well, what are we supposed to do?
We, you know, do we take this into our own hands?
What do we do? So it's just got to the point
where we really need, um,
we need the vehicles to be impounded.
We need a precedent set,
and we need this legislation to be a real deterrent
because without this, we have, there's no way
that this is gonna stop.
Okay. Got one last question from Mr. Redford.
Thank you very much. And firstly, thank you for, um,
submitting on this legislation.
It's great to hear from people like yourself
with firsthand lived experience
who live this on some cases on a daily basis.
Yeah. My two questions are, what is the mood
of your wider community?
And I'm meaning your, your next door neighbors as well.
Do they share similar sentiments to you
and are fed up with it?
And secondly, what do you say to the people
who have presented to us with an opposite view to you
that say particularly young men, uh, prior to the age of 25,
aren't fully formed and
therefore shouldn't be held accountable for their actions
because they don't quite know what their actually doing?
Um, well, I think that everyone should be
accountable for their actions.
'cause that's law at the end of the day.
Um, the sentiment of my neighbors in the wider community,
um, there's quite a lot of fear
because there has been times where locals have gone
and, um, you know, obviously tried to
stop these events from happening
and have been threatened and even assaulted.
We've had, we've had locals assaulted.
Um, so there's, it's really difficult
because they know that by calling the police a lot
of the time the police are not turning up.
Um, so it's kind of like, oh, well we just, you know,
you just have to sit tight and deal with it.
Um, but I think that obviously these people
that are attending these events,
they know what they're doing.
Um, if they've got to be accountable
and they've gotta have their cars impounded,
and I don't care if they're their parents' cars
or whatever, the family needs to be aware
that this is an ongoing problem too.
And you know, like I was listening to Samira, the lawyer
previously saying, oh, you know, like,
this needs to be balanced.
But I can tell you right now, if she was living in my house,
she would have a totally different, um,
thought process about it.
Very exactly right. Thank you. Thank you Ms.
Thank you for sharing your personal experiences.
Uh, many of us have, uh, got constituents
who have been in the same situation.
So thank you for coming on
and sharing those personal experiences.
Thank you very much. We,
now we're gonna go back into privacy.